C# v7.x: Local functions (#104)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/statements.md

### 12.6.1 General

> A *declaration_statement* declares a local variable, local constant, or local function. Declaration statements are permitted in blocks, but are not permitted as embedded statements.

Reviewer: I can't remember offhand what an embedded statement is, which means another reader might not either - maybe link to it?

Reviewer: Ah, it's saying that a declaration statement doesn't count as an embedded statement. Makes more sense.

Reviewer: (Not a change for local functions, so resolving.)

    ;
```

Unless specified otherwise below, the semantics of all grammar elements is the same as for *method_declaration* ([15.6.1](classes.md#1561-general), read in the context of a local function instead of a method.

A *local_function_declaration* may include one `async` ([§15.15](classes.md#1515-async-functions)) modifier and one `unsafe` ([§23.1](unsafe_code.md#231-general)) modifier. If the declaration includes the `async` modifier then the return type shall be `void` or a task type  ([§15.15.1](classes.md#15151-general)).

A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Each call of the function requires captured variables to be definitely assigned before the call. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return.

A local function may be called from a lexical point prior to its definition. However, it is a compile-time error for the function to be declared lexically prior to the declaration of a variable it wishes to capture.

It is a compile-time error for a local function to declare a parameter or local variable with the same name as one declared in the enclosing scope.

> Local function declaration statements are always reachable.

Reviewer 2: ```C#
class C {
    int F() {
        if (true) {
            void G() {}
            return 1;
        } else {
            void H() {}
            return 2;
        }
    }
}
```

Is there a rule that says `return 1;` is reachable and `return 2;` is not? According to [13.3.2 Statement lists](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/c86c9b0f464572b060dfa6688968237a4d23ad9e/standard/statements.md#1332-statement-lists), it depends on whether "The end point of the preceding statement is reachable." But if both local function declaration statements are reachable, then I don't see why the end point of `void G() {}` would be reachable and that of `void H() {}` would not.

Reviewer 3: There isn't such a rule right now. The compiler determines that H() is reachable.

Reviewer 3: Discussed in the committee meeting:

```suggestion
Local function bodies are always reachable. The endpoint of a local function is reachable if the beginning point of the local function is reachable.
```

    ;

local_function_header
    : local_function_modifiers? return_type identifier type_parameter_list?
        ( formal_parameter_list? ) type_parameter_constraints_clause*
    ;

local_function_modifiers
    : 'async'
    | 'unsafe'
    ;

local_function_body
    : block
    | '=>' expression ';'
    ;
```

Unless specified otherwise below, the semantics of all grammar elements is the same as for *method_declaration* ([§14.6.1](classes.md#1461-general), read in the context of a local function instead of a method.

A *local_function_declaration* may include one `async` ([§14.15](classes.md#1415-async-functions)) modifier and one `unsafe` ([§22.1](unsafe-code.md#221-general)) modifier. If the declaration includes the `async` modifier then the return type shall be `void` or a task type  ([§14.15.1](classes.md#14151-general)).

A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Captured variables must be definitely assigned before read by the body of the local function in each call to the function. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return.

> > *Example*: The following example demonstrates definite assignment for captured variables in local functions. If a local function reads a captured variable before writing it, the captured variable must be definitely assigned before calling the local function. The local function `F1` reads `s` without assigning it. It is an error if `F1` is called before `s` is definitely assigned. `F2` assigns `i` before reading it. It may be called before `i` is definitely assigned. Furthermore, `F1` may be called after `F2` because `i` is definitely assigned in `F2`.

Reviewer: This part:

> Furthermore, `F1` may be called after `F2` because `i` is definitely assigned in `F2`.

... doesn't make much sense as `F1` doesn't read `i`. (I suspect at some point both functions used the same variable.)

Reviewer 3: updated.

>
> ```csharp
> void M()
> {
>     string s;
>     int i;
>    
>     // Error: Use of unassigned local variable s:
>     F1();
>     // OK, F2 assigns i before reading it.
>     F2();
>     
>     // OK, i is definitely assigned in the body of F2:
>     s = i.ToString();
>     
>     // OK. s is now definitely assigned.
>     F1();
>     
>     void F1()
>     {
>         Console.WriteLine(s);
>     }
>     
>     void F2()
>     {
>         i = 5;
>         // OK. i is definitely assigned.
>         Console.WriteLine(i);
>     }
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*

A local function may be called from a lexical point prior to its definition. However, it is a compile-time error for the function to be declared lexically prior to the declaration of a variable it wishes to capture.

> It is a compile-time error for a local function to declare a parameter or local variable with the same name as one declared in the enclosing scope.

Reviewer: I don't think this restriction is actually correct... or at least it isn't now. The code below is valid:

```csharp
using System;

class Program
{
    static void Main()
    {
        int x = 10;
        Local1("hello");
        Local2();
        
        void Local1(string x)
        {
            Console.WriteLine(x);
        }
        
        void Local2()
        {
            string x = "hello";
            Console.WriteLine(x);
        }
    }
}
```

Is this something that changed after C# 7?

Reviewer 3: Yes. I just verified this. Your example doesn't compiler in C# 7.3, but does in 8.0. I wrote #590 to capture this.

Reviewer: Ha - looks like I've noticed this a second time above...

> A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. It is a compile time error if a captured variables is read by the body of the local function if it is not definitely assigned before each call to the function. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return (§definite-assignment-rules-for-local-function).

Reviewer: Nit: "a captured variables" => "a captured variable".

Reviewer: And possibly change "if it is not" to "but is not". (It's a little odd to have the two "ifs" in the same sentence.) That could be a later change.

> A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. It is a compile time error if a captured variables is read by the body of the local function if it is not definitely assigned before each call to the function. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return (§definite-assignment-rules-for-local-function).

Reviewer: "compile time" => "compile-time"

Local function bodies are always reachable. The endpoint of a local function is reachable if the beginning point of the local function is reachable.

> > *Example*: There are two common use cases for local functions: public iterator methods and public async methods. In iterator methods, any exceptions are observed only when calling code that enumerates the returned sequence. In async methods, any exceptions are only observed when the returned Task is awaited. The following example demonstrates separating parameter validation from the iterator implementation using a local function:

Reviewer: Normally "example" refers to the preceding text - this is more of a "general use case" - in particular it's not about reachability. Maybe the example should be right at the start of the section, under the first sentence of description?

Reviewer 3: Added brackets. I think I moved it to the right location (after the grammar).

> A local function may be called from a lexical point prior to its definition. However, it is a compile-time error for the function to be declared lexically prior to the declaration of a variable used in the local function (§7.7).

Reviewer: definition => declaration? (We have local function declarations, not local function definitions.)

>
> ```csharp
> public static IEnumerable<char> AlphabetSubset(char start, char end)
> {

> >     if (start < 'a' || start > 'z')

Reviewer: Let's add braces to this example, and a black line after the return statement.

A local constant declaration that declares multiple constants is equivalent to multiple declarations of single constants with the same type.

### §local-function-declarations-new-clause Local function declarations

A *local_function_declaration* declares a local function.

```ANTLR
local_function_declaration
    : local_function_header local_function_body
    ;

local_function_header
    : local_function_modifiers? return_type identifier type_parameter_list?
        ( formal_parameter_list? ) type_parameter_constraints_clause*
    ;

local_function_modifiers
    : 'async'
    | 'unsafe'
    ;

local_function_body
    : block
    | '=>' expression ';'
    ;
```

Unless specified otherwise below, the semantics of all grammar elements is the same as for *method_declaration* ([§14.6.1](classes.md#1461-general), read in the context of a local function instead of a method.

> A *local_function_declaration* may include one `async` ([§14.15](classes.md#1415-async-functions)) modifier and one `unsafe` ([§22.1](unsafe-code.md#221-general)) modifier. If the declaration includes the `async` modifier then the return type shall be `void` or a task type  ([§14.15.1](classes.md#14151-general)).

Reviewer 3: This will likely need to be revisited in light of generalized async return types. (`ValueTask<T>` works, among others).

> A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Each call of the function requires captured variables to be definitely assigned before the call. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return.

Reviewer 3: Adding @RikkiGibson

I found some interesting bits here, some of which don't apply until C# 8 (the reason I tagged Rikki).  Consider this example:

```csharp
public class C
{
    private string field;
    public C()
    {
        string local;
        F();
        String s = field;
        field = local;        
        void F()
        {
            this.field = "assigned";
            local = "assigned";
        }
    }
}
```

The compiler determines that the local function `F` does definitely assign `local` (`field` is definitely assigned to `null`). However, the nullable analysis doesn't set the null state of `field` or `local` to *not null* after `F()` is called. That makes sense the nullable reference spec doesn't specify that the compiler determines the null state of variables when a local function is called, but it seems odd to me. (That question doesn't need to be answered until we get to C# 8, so not blocking this PR).

Reviewer 4: It is definitely a strange corner of our flow analysis. We made a deliberate decision to *not* "flow out" nullable state changes from local functions. They only "flow in"--i.e. when you have multiple call sites, the compiler determines a "merged worst state" to use as the initial state to analyze the local function. This was due to the performance cost and complexity of definite assignment analysis versus nullable analysis.

> A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Each call of the function requires captured variables to be definitely assigned before the call. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return.

Reviewer 3: The statement "Each call of the function requires captured variables to be definitely assigned before the call." is incorrect. Captured variables must only be definitely assigned before it is *read* by the body of the local function.

Reviewer 3: Add informative examples here as well.

A local constant declaration that declares multiple constants is equivalent to multiple declarations of single constants with the same type.

### §local-function-declarations-new-clause Local function declarations

A *local_function_declaration* declares a local function.

```ANTLR
local_function_declaration
    : local_function_header local_function_body
    ;

local_function_header
    : local_function_modifier* return_type identifier type_parameter_list?
        ( formal_parameter_list? ) type_parameter_constraints_clause*
    ;
local_function_modifier
    : 'async'
    | 'unsafe'
    ;

local_function_body
    : block
    | '=>' expression ';'
    | '=>' null_conditional_invocation_expression ';'
    ;
```

> Grammar note: When recognising a *local_function_body* if both the *null_conditional_invocation_expression* and *expression* alternatives are applicable then the former shall be chosen.

Reviewer: Can we reorder the options in the grammar then? In particular it's odd for the former in the prose to be the latter in the grammar, as well as making more sense (to me anyway) as "first match wins".

Reviewer: https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/draft-v7/standard/classes.md#146-methods has null_conditional_invocation_expression first with the same text as is here.

But there's no example there either.

Suggest we add an example in 14.6 and refer to it from here.

Reviewer: 11.7.9 gives a little more motivation, but still doesn't have an expression-bodied member example.

Reviewer 3: This discussion is captured in #621 

Edit here to add a link to §14.6.1.

> Grammar note: When recognising a *local_function_body* if both the *null_conditional_invocation_expression* and *expression* alternatives are applicable then the former shall be chosen.

Reviewer 5: This might be more clear with an example.

Reviewer 3: See #621

> > *Example*: There are two common use cases for local functions: public iterator methods and public async methods. In iterator methods, any exceptions are observed only when calling code that enumerates the returned sequence. In async methods, any exceptions are only observed when the returned Task is awaited. The following example demonstrates separating parameter validation from the iterator implementation using a local function:

Reviewer 6: Why *public* iterator/async, wouldn't the same benefits apply to those with other accessibilities, and I missing something?

Reviewer 3: Good point. Let's remove "public":

```suggestion
> *Example*: There are two common use cases for local functions: iterator methods and async methods. In iterator methods, any exceptions are observed only when calling code that enumerates the returned sequence. In async methods, any exceptions are only observed when the returned Task is awaited. The following example demonstrates separating parameter validation from the iterator implementation using a local function:
```

>
> ```csharp
> public static IEnumerable<char> AlphabetSubset(char start, char end)
> {
>     if (start < 'a' || start > 'z')
>     {
>         throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(paramName: nameof(start), message: "start must be a letter");
>     }
>     if (end < 'a' || end > 'z')
>     {
>         throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(paramName: nameof(end), message: "end must be a letter");
>     }
>     if (end <= start)
>     {
>         throw new ArgumentException($"{nameof(end)} must be greater than {nameof(start)}");
>     }
>     return alphabetSubsetImplementation();
>

> >     IEnumerable<char> alphabetSubsetImplementation()

Reviewer: I normally write local functions to follow normal .NET method naming conventions, so this would be AlphabetSubsetImplementation. What do the MS docs normally do?

Reviewer: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/classes-and-structs/local-functions is inconsistent - `nthFactorial` and `GetOddSequenceEnumerator` are both used as examples...

Reviewer 3: I'd prefer `camelCaseLocalFunctionNames()`, because they are local in scope.  If you agree 👍 this comment. If you'd prefer `PascalCaseLocalFunctionsNames()`, because they are methods, 👎 this comment.

Reviewer 3: Resolution from the committee: Let's use `PascalCaseLocalFunctionNames()`

>     {

> >         for (var c = start; c < end; c++)

Reviewer: Let's add braces around this :)

> >         for (var c = start; c < end; c++)
> >             yield return c;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>         for (var c = start; c < end; c++)
>         {
>             yield return c;
>         }
```

>     }
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*

> Unless specified otherwise below, the semantics of all grammar elements is the same as for *method_declaration* ([§14.6.1](classes.md#1461-general), read in the context of a local function instead of a method.

Reviewer 6: Missing paren

```suggestion
Unless specified otherwise below, the semantics of all grammar elements is the same as for *method_declaration* ([§14.6.1](classes.md#1461-general)), read in the context of a local function instead of a method.
```

> The *identifier* of a *local_function_declaration* must be unique in its declared block scope. In other words, overloaded *local_function_declaration*s are not allowed.

Reviewer: And it can't be the same as any variables declared in the scope either?

Reviewer: Except that in C# 8 (at least) it's valid to declare a local variable within a local function, where the name of the local variable is also the name of a local function in the enclosing scope.

Reviewer 3: The second sentence has been reworded. Instead of "In other words", it says "One consequence of this is that..."

Because variables are *identifiers*, the text is valid for C# 7 and later.

> A *local_function_declaration* may include one `async` ([§14.15](classes.md#1415-async-functions)) modifier and one `unsafe` ([§22.1](unsafe-code.md#221-general)) modifier. If the declaration includes the `async` modifier then the return type shall be `void` or a task type  ([§14.15.1](classes.md#14151-general)). The `unsafe` modifier uses the containing lexical scope. The `async` modifier does not use the containing lexical scope. It is a compile-time error for *type_parameter_list* or *formal_parameter_list* to contain *attributes*.

Reviewer: Nit: double space after "a task type"

> A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Captured variables must be definitely assigned before read by the body of the local function in each call to the function. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return (§definite-assignment-rules-for-local-function).

Reviewer 5: Is "before read" grammatical?

Reviewer 3: reworded the sentence.

> A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Captured variables must be definitely assigned before read by the body of the local function in each call to the function. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return (§definite-assignment-rules-for-local-function).

Reviewer: "before read" => "before being read"?

> A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Captured variables must be definitely assigned before read by the body of the local function in each call to the function. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return (§definite-assignment-rules-for-local-function).

Reviewer 7: "Captured" is not defined.

Reviewer 3: See #622

> A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Captured variables must be definitely assigned before read by the body of the local function in each call to the function. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return (§definite-assignment-rules-for-local-function).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A local function is declared at block scope, and that function may capture variables from the enclosing scope. Captured variables must be definitely assigned before being read by the body of the local function in each call to the function. The compiler shall determine which variables are definitely assigned on return (§definite-assignment-rules-for-local-function).
```

> A local function may be called from a lexical point prior to its definition. However, it is a compile-time error for the function to be declared lexically prior to the declaration of a variable it wishes to capture.

Reviewer 7: Change "it wishes to capture" to "used in the local function".

Reviewer 7: Having said that, it is already a restriction in the language that a variable cannot be used except after its point of declaration.

Reviewer 3: That restriction is in 7.7.

Reviewer 3: Edited per https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/104#discussion_r965276993 and added a reference to §7.7

It is a compile-time error for a local function to declare a parameter or local variable with the same name as one declared in the enclosing scope.

> Local function bodies are always reachable. The endpoint of a local function is reachable if the beginning point of the local function is reachable.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Local function bodies are always reachable. The endpoint of a local function declaration is reachable if the beginning point of the local function declaration is reachable.
```

> Local function bodies are always reachable. The endpoint of a local function is reachable if the beginning point of the local function is reachable.

Reviewer: What's the difference between the local function body being reachable and the beginning point of the local function being reachable? (I suspect I know, but this seems unnecessarily cryptic.)

Reviewer 3: The discussion is here: https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/104#discussion_r616112191

I believe it is to have the correct rules on the reachability of any statement following a local function body. Maybe @gafter can suggest more clear language?

Reviewer 2: An example could help

```C#
class C {
    int M() {
        // L();
        return 1;
        int L() { return 2; }
        return 3;
    }
}
```

Because of the statement `return 1;`, the beginning point of the local function L is not reachable. Consequently, the ending point of L is not reachable, and the statement `return 3;` is not reachable. The statement `return 2;` in the body of L is considered reachable even if L is not called.

> Calls to local functions must be statically resolved.

Reviewer 7: Not sure what this means.  Should this be something said in the section describing the invocation expression, or the simple name expression?

Reviewer 7: Perhaps would be more clear to say it may not be dynamically resolved?

Reviewer: We have two examples of what it prohibits:

- Use of `dynamic` for `params` which may change whether it's expanded or not
- Use of `dynamic` for type inference

(There may be others.)

Reviewer 3: See Andy's second bullet in https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/104#issuecomment-1150455447.

If the argument to a local function is dynamic, the function to be called must be resolved at compile time, not runtime.

Reviewer 3: Replaced with the following text:

> If the argument to a local function is dynamic, the function to be called must be resolved at compile time, not runtime.

> Calls to local functions must be statically resolved.

Reviewer: Is this all about prohibiting type inference using dynamic types? Or is there more to it?

>
> ```csharp
> public static IEnumerable<char> AlphabetSubset(char start, char end)
> {
>     if (start < 'a' || start > 'z')
>     {
>         throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(paramName: nameof(start), message: "start must be a letter");
>     }
>     if (end < 'a' || end > 'z')
>     {
>         throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(paramName: nameof(end), message: "end must be a letter");
>     }
>     if (end <= start)
>     {
>         throw new ArgumentException($"{nameof(end)} must be greater than {nameof(start)}");
>     }
>     return alphabetSubsetImplementation();
>
>     IEnumerable<char> alphabetSubsetImplementation()
>     {
>         for (var c = start; c < end; c++)
>         {
>             yield return c;
>         }
>     }
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*

Unless specified otherwise below, the semantics of all grammar elements is the same as for *method_declaration* ([§14.6.1](classes.md#1461-general)), read in the context of a local function instead of a method.

> The *identifier* of a *local_function_declaration* must be unique in its declared block scope. In other words, overloaded *local_function_declaration*s are not allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *identifier* of a *local_function_declaration* must be unique in its declared block scope. One consequence of this is that overloaded *local_function_declaration*s are not allowed.
```

> A *local_function_declaration* may include one `async` ([§14.15](classes.md#1415-async-functions)) modifier and one `unsafe` ([§22.1](unsafe-code.md#221-general)) modifier. If the declaration includes the `async` modifier then the return type shall be `void` or a task type  ([§14.15.1](classes.md#14151-general)). The `unsafe` modifier uses the containing lexical scope. The `async` modifier does not use the containing lexical scope. It is a compile-time error for *type_parameter_list* or *formal_parameter_list* to contain *attributes*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *local_function_declaration* may include one `async` ([§14.15](classes.md#1415-async-functions)) modifier and one `unsafe` ([§22.1](unsafe-code.md#221-general)) modifier. If the declaration includes the `async` modifier then the return type shall be `void` or a task type ([§14.15.1](classes.md#14151-general)). The `unsafe` modifier uses the containing lexical scope. The `async` modifier does not use the containing lexical scope. It is a compile-time error for *type_parameter_list* or *formal_parameter_list* to contain *attributes*.
```
